Welcome to K-Means Clustering.
After watching this video, you will be
able to describe K-Means Clustering and explain
how the K-Means algorithm works.
You will also be able to discuss how to determine K.
K-Means is an iterative, centroid-based
clustering algorithm that partitions a dataset into similar
groups based on the distance between their centroids.
K-Means divides data into k non-overlapping
clusters, where k is a chosen parameter.
The k clusters are constructed to have
minimal variances around their centroids and maximum
dissimilarity between clusters.
Let's understand this definition with
the help of this chart showing a cluster of data
points.
At the center of the cluster is the
centroid marked with a red X.
This is the average position of all
points in the cluster.
Data points nearest to a centroid are
grouped within the same category.
A higher k value, or the number of clusters,
signifies smaller clusters with greater detail,
while a lower k value results in larger
clusters with less detail.
Let's look at how to use K-Means.
First, initialize the algorithm.
Choose the number of clusters that you
would like to partition the feature space into and
randomly select k starting centroid locations.
These initial centroids can be data points
or other points from the feature space.
Next, assign centroids.
Iteratively assign points to clusters and
update their centroids.
First, compute the distance matrix consisting
of the distances from each point to each centroid.
Then, assign each data point to the cluster
with the nearest centroid.
Update each cluster centroid as the mean
of the cluster's data points.
Repeat until the centroid positions stabilize
or you reach maximum iterations.
The algorithm converges once the centroids stop moving.
Here is an experiment demonstrating how
K-Means updates centroids and cluster points with
each iteration.
The demo starts with two unknown classes
comprising circular clusters of points in red and blue
and two randomly selected initial centroids
in gold, each represented by an X and the
plus symbol.
With each iteration, you can see the centroids
getting closer to their final destinations.
Iterations 3 and 4 are identical.
Thus, K-Means have already converged by
iteration 3.
Although the final clustering contains a
few mislabeled points, K-Means does a good job
of separating them.
However, K-Means doesn't perform very well on
imbalanced clusters.
In this experiment, the unknown classes, indicated
by the pair of circular clusters of points
in red and blue, differ in their number of points.
The red cluster has 200 points and the blue one has 10.
Interestingly, the result in the first
iteration is quite good.
The centroid updates for the larger cluster
stabilize very quickly.
However, the smaller cluster centroid drifts
closer to the larger cluster centroid and
its cluster consumes more and more of the larger
cluster's points.
K-Means assumes that clusters are convex, meaning
that any line drawn between two points
remains within the cluster.
The figure here shows a non-convex set of
points colored blue.
The boundary defined by the blue line segments
approximates the boundary of the set of points.
The red lines outline what is called the convex hull of the points.
The algorithm also assumes that the clusters
contain approximately the same number of points.
Because statistical variance is sensitive to
outliers, K-Means can perform poorly in
the presence of noise.
As a partition-based algorithm, K-Means is
efficient and scales well to big data.
The goal of K-Means is to minimize the within-cluster
variance for all clusters simultaneously.
Mathematically, this means a double sum over each
cluster, i, and each point, x, within
each cluster.
Ci of the square distance between x and this
cluster's centroid, mu i.
Here are the results from three experiments to
illustrate how well K-Means performs under
different conditions.
The three scatter plots on the left are from
data generated with Scikit-learn's make
blob function.
The three blobs represent three different clusters.
The difference between the three datasets is
the standard deviation of each blob, increasing
from 1 to 4 to 15.
Higher values disperse the blobs and they
become visually less distinguishable.
On the right, are each experiment's K-Means
clustering results for k equals 3.
The red Xs indicate the K-Means cluster centroids.
K-Means does not know the classes or colors
assigned to the blobs in the input data.
The goal of these experiments is for K-Means
to uncover these three classes.
As you can see, K-Means has distinguished the
blobs quite well for standard deviations
of 1 and 4.
Where the blobs overlap, the resulting clusters
have errors.
It would be unreasonable to expect any clustering
algorithm to untangle blobs where the standard
deviation is 15.
However, K-Means did what was instructed to do
and generated three clusters anyway.
Intuitively, you might expect at most two
clusters to be found, the core and outlying points
If the input data had three class labels,
as depicted, the two features would be incapable
of separating them.
More features would be needed to accomplish
this separation.
Observe that, as the standard deviation of
the blobs increases, the cluster centroids
that K-Means finds get closer together.
What if K differs from the unknown number
of classes in the input data?
Here, the experiment is run with k equals 2
clusters for K-Means to determine, and three
blobs with three unknown classes are given.
For a standard deviation of 1, K-Means correctly
identifies one blob and merges the other two
into one cluster, with its centroid between
the two blobs.
Similarly, for a standard deviation of 4,
K-Means identifies one blob and merges most
of the other two blobs into one cluster,
with its centroid between the two blobs.
When the standard deviation is 15,
K-Means is left with no option and must impose the
two clusters onto what looks like indistinguishable data.
As the standard deviation of the blobs increases,
the cluster centroids that K-Means finds get
closer together.
The two blobs gradually merge into one,
and a blob can have only one centroid.
When K is too large, K-Means returns unacceptable results.
How do you find the best value for K when
you don't know much about your data?
Choosing K is difficult for complex data.
When the data is separable, choosing the
suitable K is feasible.
How do you know whether the data is separable?
While obvious in two or three dimensions,
you can't visualize the patterns easily for
higher-dimensional feature spaces.
You can gain some insight by considering
scatter plots between pairs of your variables to see
whether any of these demonstrate separability.
Some heuristic techniques for gauging
K-Means' performance for a given K include silhouette
analysis, which measures how similar a data point
is to its cluster, known as cohesion,
compared to other clusters, known as separation.
The Elbow method is a plot of the K-Means objective
function for different numbers of clusters,
and the Davies-Bouldin index measures each
cluster's average similarity ratio, with
the cluster most similar.
In this video, you learned that K-Means is an
iterative, centroid-based clustering algorithm
that partitions a dataset into similar groups
based on the distance between their centroids.
The K-Means clustering algorithm categorizes
data points into clusters using a mathematical
distance measure from the cluster center.
K-Means doesn't perform very well on imbalanced
clusters and assumes that clusters are convex.
The objective of K-Means is to minimize the
within-cluster variance for all clusters simultaneously.
Some heuristic techniques for gauging K-Means'
performance for a given K include silhouette
analysis, the elbow method, and the Davies-Bouldin index.